---
title: "Thoughts about Data Visualization"
date: 2021-02-03
---
Visual representation of a clean set of data (dataset) helps people obtain a precise and deep macro and micro understanding of reality. Data visualization has and generates value in any type and size of business. According to [1], computer-based display systems provide a visual representation to help people perform tasks effectively. Of course, generating visualizations requires a cognitive process that, when done well, leads to new ideas, discoveries, and data-driven decisions.

Data visualization (from here data viz) contributes to data analysis and cognitive growth of those involved in this domain. Visualization is taking existing data, adjusting it for visual representation computer systems to generate visualizations (reports and dashboards)and increase the capacity of cognitive, ergo retention [2]. 

Data viz uses computational systems [3] that facilitate the development and presentation of dynamic and interactive graphics.  They increase the capacity for analysis, interpretation, and report. For example, tools like PowerBI or Tableau facilitate interactive visual representation and business intelligence. Without a doubt, before reaching data viz, the key is to start knowing what the questions to be solved are, then specify the source and technique to obtain data. The next phase consists of storing, integrating, cleaning, and categorizing the collected data. Naturally, working with clean and structured data is favorable for the analysis and extraction of knowledge. Once these steps, it is appropriate to proceed with the visual representation; otherwise, data viz will be invalid.

The framework of [4] synthesizes the elements of visualization, using three key questions: what? what for? and how? The first step is to figure out what type, category, and data source use. Then understand why; In other words, identify the purpose of it. Then, recognize the techniques, tactics, and procedures necessary to achieve the purpose, that is, the how.

Additionally, [1] [3] [4] show differences in the effort of human perception. For example, what is the difference between using a bar chart and a pie chart in terms of perception? A pie chart requires discerning between angles, curvatures, and proportions. On the contrary, a bar graph only needs to conceptualize height and scale. It is more precise. It is preferable to avoid using 3D graphics when two dimensions (2D) are sufficient. Similarly, when a one-dimensional is enough, there is no point in using a 2D display because the more we decrease or distract the user's cognitive load and memorize, the better [4].

Consequently, data visualization involves properly recognizing when to use tables (scatter diagrams, bar graphs, point, line graphs, heat maps, pie charts), maps (vector fields, tensors, flows, spatial data), and networks (tree structures, adjacency matrix views) [1]. Identify the relevant visual channels; in other words, the graphic elements of an image such as spatial position, length, angle, area, depth, color, curvature, volume, shape, and movement. In sum, as long as the channel matches the human perception system it is, to some extent, an effective display design.

With this in mind and understanding the full data cycle, from ingestion and storage to analysis and visualization, the value of data visualization is inescapable. However, clarifying the intrinsic virtues is not easy - recognizing and transmitting their value, in many cases, is a challenge - therefore, this document. Organizations need to know clearly and precisely if their investments are being properly focused. So, it should be mentioned that all data tells a story. Data visualization is not words, it is visualizations, it is user experience, so they cannot always be translated in quantitative terms, but in qualitative terms, since they improve the experience and clarity when analyzing a certain story [4] [5].

One of the best-known definitions of visualization is that of [5], who specify it as the use of interactive visual representations of data supported by computer to amplify cognition. So the concern arises: How accurate can a measure of human cognitive ability be? How can human thoughts be measured? Analyzing the purpose of data visualization, the sentiment, and results generated by its use, it is possible to understand its value in the business context.

Based on [6], people who know the question only require a simple query to the database. Some people are looking for a way and form by which they can transmit that knowledge to their peers or other audiences. Besides, producing retention allows finding new or profound questions to solve. According to [7] and [8], the activities of searching, navigating, gaining knowledge, and asking timely, relevant, and pertinent questions are not easy to establish and measure - in this understanding lies the value of data viz.

Data viz improves similarities and differences identification when users are not familiar with their data, including data that is reachable but did not know. When those involved are unaware of the questions to answer - they will not find meaning in the story behind that data. Consequently, data viz has value given that 1) it increases the memory and available processing resources, 2) it reduces the search for information, 3) it enhances pattern recognition, it reduces the difficulty of perceptual inference operations, 4) it allows the use of mechanisms of perceptual attention for monitoring and 5) enables the codification of information in a manipulative, interactive and dynamic medium.

In sum, identifying and communicating the value of data viz as an analytical tool is, on many occasions, challenging since it requires judging how and why data viz is useful. The entire data cycle depends on the cover, from ingestion and storage to analysis and visualization. The work environment, the culture of data viz professionals, the professional clearly illustrate the value of data viz. Undoubtedly, if a group of people with enthusiasm and interest in aligning and contributing to achieving a common purpose, they will be able to unlock knowledge and ideas based on data.  An accurate and concise story (product) generates well-being, happiness, and security. The purpose of this document is to motivate the clarification of the value of data visualization. Finally, there is no data visualization without proper data integration through transformation drivers such as people, technology, and creativity. When we try to do things the same or conventional way, we will most likely never know how great other perspectives can be.
 
